XZ backdoor:

In February 2024, a malicious backdoor was introduced to the Linux build of the xz utility within the liblzma library in versions 5.6.0 and 5.6.1 by an account using the name 'Jia Tan'. The backdoor gives an attacker who possesses a specific Ed448 private key remote code execution through OpenSSH on the affected Linux system. The issue has been given the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures number CVE-2024-3094 and has been assigned a CVSS score of 10.0, the highest possible score.

While xz is commonly present in most Linux distributions, at the time of discovery the backdoored version had not yet been widely deployed to production systems, but was present in development versions of major distributions. The backdoor was discovered by the software developer Andres Freund, who announced his findings on 29 March 2024.

Background:
Microsoft employee and PostgreSQL developer Andres Freund reported the backdoor after investigating a performance regression in Debian Sid. Freund noticed that SSH connections were generating an unexpectedly high amount of CPU usage as well as causing errors in Valgrind, a memory debugging tool. Freund reported his finding to Openwall Project's open source security mailing list, which brought it to the attention of various software vendors. The attacker made efforts to obfuscate the code, as the backdoor consists of multiple stages that act together.

Once the compromised version is incorporated into the operating system, it alters the behavior of OpenSSH's SSH server daemon by abusing the systemd library, allowing the attacker to gain administrator access. According to the analysis by Red Hat, the backdoor can 'enable a malicious actor to break sshd authentication and gain unauthorized access to the entire system remotely'.

A subsequent investigation found that the campaign to insert the backdoor into the XZ Utils project was a culmination of approximately three years of effort, between November 2021 and February 2024, by a user going by the name Jia Tan and the nickname JiaT75 to gain access to a position of trust within the project. After a period of pressure on the founder and head maintainer to hand over the control of the project via apparent sock puppetry, Jia Tan gained the position of co-maintainer of XZ Utils and was able to sign off on version 5.6.0, which introduced the backdoor, and version 5.6.1, which patched some anomalous behavior that could have been apparent during software testing of the operating system.

Some of the suspected sock puppetry pseudonyms include accounts with usernames like Jigar Kumar, krygorin4545, and misoeater91. It is suspected that the names Jia Tan, as well as the supposed code author Hans Jansen (for versions 5.6.0 and 5.6.1), are pseudonyms chosen by the participants of the campaign. Neither have any sort of visible public presence in software development beyond the short few years of the campaign.

For more information, you can visit the Wikipedia page: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XZ_Utils_backdoor